DOCUMENT WITH PICTURES:

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1eTu0q5RjkaKut7kVIUAN8q9fsSBreSZQOf7-ojzA6GY/edit?usp=sharing

Transcription:

Mechanical VentilatioIn overview – UX focus
Main source: 
https://www.medcram.com/courses/COVID19-ventilator-mechanical-ventilation

AIM: to maintain homeostasis between exhaled CO2 and inhaled O2 concentrations


Patient connected to ventilator via endotracheal tube (ET), provides airway protection, avoiding liquids and fluids from going down, or also providing full support for the respiratory act.
The ET tube is built to pass the vocal cords roughly ½ the length of the tube, going towards the lungs branch, there, with an airway protection balloon, we can provide airway protection. On top of the balloon ( mouth side ), a tube can be present to provide subglottic suctioning, meaning removal of liquids or solids that accumulated on top of the airway protection. 




To start ventilating, we can touch multiple parameters: 
Pressure (we can push a certain pressure into the lungs)
Volume (we can transfer a certain amount of air in the lungs)
Rate (we can select the frequency of the respiratory act)
Flow (we can select the speed at which the volume is transferred in and out);
Residual pressure (how much pressure do we always want to be in the lungs, even while pausing between respiratory acts)
Oxygen (how much oxygen we want to supply to the patient)
Control (if the ventilator or the patient is in charge to start the respiratory act)

All of this  is summarized in selecting the operation mode for the ventilator to be operating in


VENTILATOR MODES


AC - ASSIST CONTROL (Continuous Mandatory Ventilation (CMV))


The patient starts the ventilation act (respiratory cycle) by provoking negative pressure build up in the ET (trying to breathe). The negative pressure will then be detected by the ventilator that will start the respiratory act. 


In this case, once the ventilation is triggered, the ventilator will provide the Volume to be set by the user when in AC mode.


Volume can be anywhere between 500-600ml, ideally 8ml/kg og Ideal Body Weight.


NOTE: Respiratory Rate is also an important setting here, i.e. 10 (acts per minute), setting the lower threshold of respiratory acts in one minute. This means that, if the machine does not sense a new trigger (after a previous one) in 60/RR seconds, the machine will automatically start the respiratory act, delivering the set volume.


A patient therefore can never breathe less than the set RR.


NOTE: Compliance is defined as C’ = dV/dP  (first derivative of volume change over pressure change, from (for ideal gas) PV= nRT)


If C’ is high, the lung is said to be very compliant.


There’s a need in AC mode to read the PRESSURE to know the C’ of the lungs.
C’ is not constant, it can change, therefore an ALARM is needed in case the pressure drops or rises to much! USER must be able to set those limits.


PC – Pressure Control


Same as AC mode, but Pressure is set instead of volume, and volume is read by the machine. 
C’ is not constant, it can change, therefore an ALARM is needed in case the Volume drops or rises to much! USER must be able to set those limits.



CPAP (if noninvasive ventilation, mask ) – PEEP (invasive) (Positive expiratory end pressure)
The user sets a constant pressure that the patient is getting (5-20ml of water). This is the pressure that will always be in the lungs to keep the alveoli open.
This mode should have its own dial.


Pressure Support 
Similar to PC, but here the patient triggers every breath


VENT ORDERS
How does a doctor issue an order of ventilation?
i.e. MODE AC, 16, TV 550, FiO2 50, PEEP 5
to be read as: Assist control, 16 RR, Tidal Volume 550ml, 50% Oxygen, end pressure 5ml H20
Note: RR and TV controls the CO2 concentration
Note: FiO2 and PEEP controls the O2 concentration (oxygenation)
Note: the higher the PEEP, the more alveoli you can open, the better the oxygenation.
Chart Example, note that when the ventilator is triggering the breath, no negative pressure peak is detected (which is caused by the patient when trying the breathe) 


PEAK and PLATEAU pressure
When air is going into the lung (dynamic), the resistance is offered by the airways. Once the lungs are inflated, the pressure offered by the lungs is their compliance, not the airways anymore.
Peak pressure has to do with airways
Plateau pressure has to do with the lung compliance
NOTE: if the patient has an issue with the airways, the peak pressure is going to change!
Chart showing the pressures under consideration. The “zero” in the Paw axis is actually the PEEP pressure, which will be >0.


NOTE: if the difference between peak and plateau is above 5mmHg, it is regarded as ELEVATED PEAK PRESSURE, if the pressure alarm is going off, THE USER WILL WANT TO KNOW IF THE PARAMETER THAT IS HIGH IS THE PEAK OR THE PLATEAU PRESSURE
A high peak pressure might mean bronchospasm, secretion, mucus, tip of secretion tube occluded
A  High plateau might mean dorp in C’, PTX, Pulmonary edema, ARDS, Pneumonia


Medical Note for AC mode: increasing the RATE, increases ventilation, but also increases dead space (air that goes into the mouth/trachea, that is not going to be used for the respiration, roughly 150ccm). Usually tough, increasing tidal volume is a more efficient way to increase ventilation as every increase in TV goes directly into the lungs, not like in RR.
Medical Note for AC mode: a too high TV might cause repetitive collapse of the alveoli, inducing inflammation (provoking ARDS, with ARDS therefore, the tidal volume is usually low)!
Note: VERY IMPORTANT, A SUCCESIVE BREATH MUST START ONLY AND ONLY IF THE PREVIOUS IS FINISHED AND AIR LEFT THE LUNGS AS EXPECTED, otherwise the patient might suffer breath stacking and COPD.
Medical note: PEEP opens up the alveoli, but also increase the intra-thoracic pressure, which applies pressure on the heart, and increase pressure in the right atrium. Which translates into lower venous return, and lower cardiac output, which means lower BLOD PRESSURE, therefore, INCREASING PEEP, might lower blood pressure. Anyway, in patients with congestive heart failure, increasing PEEP might save them.

Ventilation CHANGES with ARDS and COPD
Medical consideration (operation flow)
Scenario : settings AC 12, TV 400, FiO2 40%, P5
Blood gas results: 7.26 | 60 | 55 |26
To be read as: 7.26 pH, 60 pCO2, 55 pO2, 26 HCO3-

pH is low, and pCO2 is high, as they go in different directions, it is a respiratory disorder, as pH is low, it is a respiratory acidosis, most likely we are under ventilating, and as pO2 is low as well, we’re under oxygenating. 

To know if the patient is sedated or not is important as the setting AC 12, means the RR is 12, but if they are not sedated, this might mean that they could be breathing faster than a 12 RR. It is important as, if they are not sedated, WE NEED TO KNOW THE ACTUAL RR!  As if we push the RR higher to improve the ventilation, this might not result in a better ventilation (the patient might be already breathing above our threshold!

We therefore need to know both the doct. Settings and the patient response!

Now, to improve the ventilation, we could improve AC12 to AC14-16, and TV is quite low too, so it could be raised to TV 500 (from TV 400), both these changes will improve the pH (increase it) and lower the pCO2. Now, to improve the Oxygenation, we can increase PEEP or FiO2, but If the patient’s blood pressure is on the lower margin, we do not want to increase PEEP, as it will usually increase inter thoracic pressure on the heart and lower the blood pressure as explained before. Therefore, we would increase FiO2. But if the patient doesn’t have marginal blood pressure, and has congestive heart failure (CHF) then we have plenty of venous return, and then they probably could have pulmonary edema in the alveoli, therefore increasing PEEP to i.e. 10, could be a better choice, solving the edema by pushing out the fluid and allowing the heart to work better.


This choice therefore depends on the clinical situation.


Acute Respiratory Distress syndrome  (ARDS)

Inflammatory condition of the lungs -> the lungs become very stiff - > C’  DROPS !

Therefore, we will have elevated plateau pressure. The alveoli will fill with fluid and collapse. TV should be, by research, be limited. Therefore, an open lung approach could be used. The lower the pO2, the higher PEEP is maintained (12, 14). Then, low tidal volume (6-8 ml/kg IBW, measured by height, in the 4-500 range) Alveoli stay open.

COPD patients
very different than ARDS, C’ in this case is very high, the problem here is that the airways at the end of the branch are obstructed, therefore is really hard to get air out of the lungs, which means air gets trapped. Because of this, we have very long expiratory phases. Typically, the patient has high CO2.
Here one might be tempted to increase the RR or TV to lower pCO2, but by doing this we increase the air in the lung, risking respiratory stacks 
Normally, in time terms, the breathing is 1/3 INSPIRATION and 2/3 EXPIRATION. What we can do in COPD is to lower the time it takes to do the inspiration, therefore increasing the IFR (intake Flow Rate), that in normal conditions are around 60 Liters /minute, here they will be around 80 -100 Liters per minute. This way, we can get air in quickly, and have more time for the air to come out.
NOTE:  in this and every situation, FLOW MUST COME BACK TO ZERO AT THE END OF THE RESPIRATORY ACT ! (Risk of hyper inflating).


Liberation from the Ventilator
Protocols in ICU to do (every single day):
Lifting Sedation
Liberation trial - >  move the mode to act as closely as possible to physiological, observe the patient for a few  (2-3) hours and take a blood gas analysis (ABG). If the ABG is good, then it’s a good sign. 
Another index to keep an eye open on is the RSBI (Rapid Shallow Breathing Index, or Tobin Index, RSBT = RR / TV. 
RSBI  index > 105 is a bad sign, you do not want a  patient to come of a ventilator breathing fast and short. 
NIF Index  ( around -30, it’s good) 
MV (Minute Ventilation ) below 15 Liters /Minute, shows that the patient doesn’t need to breathe very fast.



CHECKLIST TO REMOVE PATIENT 
Mechanics of ventilation are Good (completed a liberation trial or more) 	
Mental Status (is the patient mentally alert enough to protect the airway, it can be the first reason why they came in in the first place) 
Secretions (are there copious secretions coming out of the endotracheal tube?);
Air Leak (when deflating the balloon at the end of ET, air should leak!) (there can be Tracheal swellings around the balloon area, stopping air to get out);

